# Introduction

## Description

The goal of this exercise is to practice GPU programming using the CUDA
language and experience first hand improving the performance of GEMM (General
Matrix Multiplication) which is a staple in many important applications such as
machine learning.

# Building and Running

## Environment Setup

The homework is setup to run with the nvcc compiler (NVIDIA CUDA compiler)
and a Make build system.  This system is already in place in
thompson.cs.pitt.edu.

## Directory Structure and Makefile Script

Here is an overview of the directory structure:

```
# Source code you will be **modifying**.
mat_mul_gpu.cu: Matrix multiplication program that can perform the multiplication on either:
Policy 1 - the CPU, Policy 2 - the GPU, and Policy 3 - the GPU using shared memory.

# Other scripts and directories
Makefile : The build script for the Make tool.
\*.py : Scripts to extract performance numbers from the outputs and store in tabular format under data/.
\*.plt : GNUPlot scripts to convert the tabular format data files into PDF plots under plots/.
diffs/ : Directory where diffs between CPU and GPU outputs are stored.
outputs/ : Directory where outputs after running the program are stored.
plots/ : Directory where PDF plots are stored.
data/ : Directory where tabular data from whch the plots are derived are stored.
```

In order to build the project and run the experiments, you only need to do 'make' to invoke the 'Makefile' script:

If successful, it will produce the binaries: devicequery, mat\_vec\_gpu, and mat\_mul\_gpu.
Devicequery is just a short program that outputs device characteristics of your
GPU (needed for the performance analysis task later).  Mat\_mul\_gpu is your matrix multiplication program.

Make will also generate results of experiments using all combinations of the
three policies and various thread block sizes.  The results are stored in the
outputs/ directory and also side-by-side diffs between Policy 1 vs. Policy 2
and Policy 1 vs.  Policy 3 are generated and stored in the diffs/ directory.
When you debug the program, you will find these side-by-side diffs useful.  The
output is selected elements from the result matrix and if you did your GPU
programming correctly, then it should match the output from the CPU (Policy 1)
--- minus some floating point imprecision that has already been taken into
account in the diff.py Python script.

If you only wish to build your CUDA files and not run the experiments, just do
'make build' to invoked the 'build' target in the 'Makefile' script:

```
$ make build
```

If you wish to remove all files generated (object files and experiment output), invoke the 'clean' target:

```
$ make clean
```

# Your Tasks

All the places where you have to complete code is clearly marked with '// TODO'
comments.  

## Task 1: Complete the scaffolding code to invoke the GPU

Complete the copy\_host\_to\_device and copy_device_to_host functions required to
copy the data back and forth between the CPU and GPU.  Review the examples and
the APIs in the slides.  Then, insert the call to launch the mm_gpu kernel
using a two dimensional grid and a two dimensional thread block.  Again, follow
the example on the slides.  Once you are done, you should see the printf in
mm_gpu printing to the screen:

```
$ ./mat_mul_gpu 1024 32 2 nodebug
Grid(16, 0) Block (0, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (1, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (2, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (3, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (4, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (5, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (6, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (7, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (8, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (9, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (10, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (11, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (12, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (13, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (14, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (15, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (16, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (17, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (18, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (19, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (20, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (21, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (22, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (23, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (24, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (25, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (26, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (27, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (28, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (29, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (30, 5)
Grid(16, 0) Block (31, 5)
Grid(23, 1) Block (0, 0)
Grid(23, 1) Block (1, 0)
Grid(23, 1) Block (2, 0)
Grid(23, 1) Block (3, 0)
Grid(23, 1) Block (4, 0)
...
```

You can see the output generated by each thread and the coordinate of each
thread in the kernel.  Now, the coordinates of the thread that gets printed
out first may differ for you since the order in which GPU dispatches thread
blocks and schedules warps is non-deterministic.  You will notice, one thing
though: thread.x coordinates always get printed out contiguously from 0 to
31 with all other coordinates remaining the same.  That is because those
threads belong to the same warp, and threads in the same warp always execute
together in lockstep in a SIMD unit. 

You can use printfs like the above to debug your CUDA code, just like your C
code.  One caveat: you cannot use printfs within the \_\_global\_\_ device function
to print out host memory (your system memory).  Vice-versa, you can't use
printfs within your host code (your main function) to print out device memory
(GPU memory).  Which makes complete sense, right?  They can't see each other's
memories.

## Task 2: Implement the naive GPU matrix multiply (mm_gpu)

Complete the implentation by looking at the lecture slides.  It should be
pretty straighforward, really.  Don't forget to remove the above printf.  If
you've done your job, the diffs for Policy 2 should start to pass.

For example, if you see the following:

```
$ cat diffs/mat_mul_gpu.2.32.diff
Diff success!
```

Then you've done a good job.  The diff files named mat_mul_gpu.2.*.diff are the result of diffing Policy 2 (mm_gpu) against Policy 1 (mm_cpu).
Again, don't forget to remove the spurious printf or the diff will always give you a failure.

## Task 3: Implement the optimized GPU matrix multiply (mm_gpu_shared)

This version uses shared memory and loop tiling to speed up the matrix
multiply.  This will be a bit more challenging since it is extra credit.  But
if you go to the linked NVIDIA page in the code:
https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-best-practices-guide/index.html#shared-memory-in-matrix-multiplication-c-ab

It explains to you what needs to be done.  Note how after filling in the shared
memory using multiple threads, there is a \_\_syncthreads() call.  That call is
important to ensure that the shared memory is completely filled before using
it.  It is a form of thread synchronization so that we don't have data races
where threads try to read a shared memory that is not yet filled.  

If you want to learn more about loop tiling, please read the wikipedia page:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loop_nest_optimization#Example:_matrix_multiplication

I have already declared the shared memory for you with the
\_\_shared\_\_ modifier.  I did this part for you because allocating dynamic shared
memory is a bit hairy.  But do take a look at how I did it.

If you've done your job, the diffs for Policy 3 should also pass.

For example, if you see the following:

```
$ cat diffs/mat_mul_gpu.3.32.diff
Diff success!
```

Then you've done a good job.  The diff files named mat_mul_gpu.3.*.diff are the result of diffing Policy 3 (mm_gpu_shared) against Policy 1 (mm_cpu).

## Task 4: Generate performance profile plots and analyze

Invoking the 'plots' target will generate a list of plots under the plots/ folder:

```
make plots
```

It also generates .dat files under the data/ folder from which the plots are generated.  Please refer to these files when answering the discussion questions on GradeScope.  A brief description of each plot follows.

### MatVecTime.pdf / MatMulTime.pdf

This is a bar plot that compares execution times for Policy 1 (CPU), Policy 2 (GPU without shared memory tiling), and Policy 3 (GPU with shared memory tiling), for various thread block sizes.  Of course, for the CPU execution times, thread block size is irrelevant and the same bar for the same run is replicated (was just easier to do it this way in GNUPlot).  Here are explanations for each key in the legend:

* Memory Copy : Time taken to copy data back and forth between host memory and device (GPU) memory.
* Compute : Time taken to execute the GPU kernel that does the computation.

### MatVecUtilizationProfile.\*.pdf / MatMulUtilizationProfile.\*.pdf

These are line plots that display various utilization metrics for Policy 2 (GPU without shared memory tiling), and Policy 3 (GPU with shared memory tiling), for various thread block sizes.  Try runnining devicequery to discover device capabilities to fully understand these metrics.  One capability that is not listed in devicequery but is implied by the revision number and Tesla P100 model name is that it has **two warp schedulers** that can issue two warps per cycle.  Here are explanations for each key in the legend:

* SM Utilization : What percentage of SMs have at least one thread block active within them on average.
* Warp Utilization : What percentage of the 32-wide warp is doing useful work on average.
* Warp Occupancy : What percentage of warp slots are occupied in each SM on average.  Compare against the 'Maximum threads per SM' returned by devicequery.  Divide that number by 32 and that is how many warp slots there are in the SM, with 100% occupancy meaning they are all filled.  Having a high occupancy helps with multithreading as we learned in class.
* Ave. eligible warps per scheduler : How many warps are eligible to be issued per warp scheduler on average in the SM (100% being one warp).  Eligible means that the warp is not stalled or waiting for a memory access and is ready to be issued this cycle.  Caveat: it is an average number so the eligible warps could be concentrated in one of the two warp schedulers but it is a good indicator of warp utilization.
* Throughput (GFLOPS) : Computation throughput in GFLOPS the GPU was able to achieve on the kernel.  Compare against 'Peak throughput (GFLOPS)' returned by devicequery.  Note that the peak GFLOPS (Giga Floating-point Operations per Second) is theoretical as in reality, no workload can achieve it.  Even if there are no bubbles in the timeline, there are always address calculating instructions, load/store instructions, and control flow instructions in the kernel that do not utilize the FP units in the SM in a given cycle, leaving them idle.  But, expert GPU programmers get close by using techniques we learned in class such as loop unrolling.

### MatVecMemoryProfile.\*.pdf / MatMulMemoryProfile.\*.pdf

These are bar and line plots that display various memory access metrics for Policy 2 (GPU without shared memory tiling), and Policy 3 (GPU with shared memory tiling), for various thread block sizes.  For reference, here is the memory hierarchy for each SM of the Tesla P100 GPU:

* Share Memory : 64 KB, ~24 cycles access time
* L1 Cache : 24 KB, ~80 cycles access time
* L2 Cache : 4 MB, ~200~300 cycles access time
* DRAM : ~400~500 cycles access time

Here are explanations for each key in the legend:

* Shared Memory : Percentage of memory accesses to the shared memory.
* L1 Hit : Percentage of global memory accesses serviced by the L1 cache.
* L2 Hit : Percentage of global memory accesses serviced by the L2 cache.
* DRAM : Percentage of global memory accesses serviced by the global memory DRAM.
* DRAM Transfer Rate (GB/s) : Average bandwidth consumption of the DRAM bus.  Compare against 'Global memory bandwidth (GB/s)' returned by devicequery.

## Submission

Once you are done, you can submit to the GradeScope "Homework 4 Part 2" link.  Since the GradeScope machines do
not have GPUs it will not be autograded, and will be manually graded on thompson.cs.pitt.edu using the diff results.

# Resources

* identical 3 policies but for the matrix vector multiplication I showed on the alides:
  [/resources/gpu_experiments/mat_vec_gpu.cu](/resources/gpu_experiments/mat_vec_gpu.cu)
* NVIDIA guide on how to use shared memory for matrix multiplication:
  https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-best-practices-guide/index.html#shared-memory-in-matrix-multiplication-c-ab
